ARROW-15578: [Java][Doc] Document C Data Interface and how to interface with other languages (#12794)
apache/arrow: docs/source/java/cdata.rst

.. "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
.. KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
.. specific language governing permissions and limitations
.. under the License.

================
C Data Interface
================

.. contents::

Arrow supports exchanging data without copying or serialization within the same process
through the :ref:`c-data-interface`, even between different language runtimes.

Java to Python
--------------

Use this guide to implement :doc:`Java to Python <../python/integration/python_java.rst>`
communication using the C Data Interface.

Java to C++
-----------

Example: Share an Int64 array from C++ to Java:

**C++ Side**

Use this guide to :doc:`compile arrow <../developers/cpp/building.rst>` library:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ git clone https://github.com/apache/arrow.git
    $ cd arrow/cpp
    $ mkdir build   # from inside the `cpp` subdirectory
    $ cd build
    $ cmake .. --preset ninja-debug-minimal
    $ cmake --build .
    $ tree debug/
    debug/
    ├── libarrow.800.0.0.dylib
    ├── libarrow.800.dylib -> libarrow.800.0.0.dylib
    └── libarrow.dylib -> libarrow.800.dylib

> Define C++ code CDataCppBridge.cpp that export function **fillCArray** for third party
> consumers like Java:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implement a function in CDataCppBridge.cpp that exports an array via the C Data Interface:
```

.. code-block:: cpp

    #include <iostream>
    #include <arrow/api.h>
    #include <arrow/c/bridge.h>

    using arrow::Int64Builder;

    void FillInt64Array(const uintptr_t c_schema_ptr, const uintptr_t c_array_ptr) {
        arrow::Int64Builder builder;
        builder.Append(1);
        builder.Append(2);
        builder.Append(3);
        builder.AppendNull();
        builder.Append(5);
        builder.Append(6);
        builder.Append(7);
        builder.Append(8);
        builder.Append(9);
        builder.Append(10);
        std::shared_ptr<arrow::Array> array = *builder.Finish();

        struct ArrowSchema* c_schema = reinterpret_cast<struct ArrowSchema*>(c_schema_ptr);
        auto c_schema_status = arrow::ExportType(*array->type(), c_schema);
        if (!c_schema_status.ok()) c_schema_status.Abort();

        struct ArrowArray* c_array = reinterpret_cast<struct ArrowArray*>(c_array_ptr);
        auto c_array_status = arrow::ExportArray(*array, c_array);
        if (!c_array_status.ok()) c_array_status.Abort();
    }

**Java Side**

> For this example, we will use `JavaCPP`_ to call our main C++ **fillCArray** function from Java,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, we will use `JavaCPP`_ to call our C++ function from Java,
```

> For this example, we will use `JavaCPP`_ to call our main C++ **fillCArray** function from Java,

Author: Added

            <maven.compiler.target>8</maven.compiler.target>
            <arrow.version>8.0.0</arrow.version>
        </properties>
        <dependencies>
            <dependency>
                <groupId>org.bytedeco</groupId>
                <artifactId>javacpp</artifactId>
                <version>1.5.7</version>
            </dependency>
            <dependency>
                <groupId>org.apache.arrow</groupId>
                <artifactId>arrow-c-data</artifactId>
                <version>${arrow.version}</version>
            </dependency>
            <dependency>
                <groupId>org.apache.arrow</groupId>
                <artifactId>arrow-memory-netty</artifactId>
                <version>${arrow.version}</version>
            </dependency>
        </dependencies>
    </project>

.. code-block:: java

    import org.bytedeco.javacpp.annotation.Platform;
    import org.bytedeco.javacpp.annotation.Properties;
    import org.bytedeco.javacpp.tools.InfoMap;
    import org.bytedeco.javacpp.tools.InfoMapper;

    @Properties(
            target = "CDataJavaToCppExample",
            value = @Platform(
                    include = {

>                             "CDataCppBridge.cpp"

Reviewer: Hmm. We should have separate header/C++ files then, we shouldn't include a source file.

Author: Sorry, my mistake. Base on this [reference](https://github.com/bytedeco/javacpp#accessing-native-apis) we declare the file *.h as a header and define function FillInt64Array to export.

        /usr/lib/libSystem.B.dylib (compatibility version 1.0.0, current version 1311.0.0)

**Java Test**

Let's create a Java class to test our bridge:

.. code-block:: java

    import org.apache.arrow.c.ArrowArray;
    import org.apache.arrow.c.ArrowSchema;
    import org.apache.arrow.c.Data;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.BufferAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.BigIntVector;

    public class TestCDataInterface {
        public static void main(String[] args) {
            try(
                BufferAllocator allocator = new RootAllocator();
                ArrowSchema arrowSchema = ArrowSchema.allocateNew(allocator);
                ArrowArray arrowArray = ArrowArray.allocateNew(allocator)
            ){
                CDataJavaToCppExample.FillInt64Array(
                        arrowSchema.memoryAddress(), arrowArray.memoryAddress());
                try(
                    BigIntVector bigIntVector = (BigIntVector) Data.importVector(
                            allocator, arrowArray, arrowSchema, null)
                ){

>                     System.out.println("C++-allocated array: "
>                             + bigIntVector);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                    System.out.println("C++-allocated array: " + bigIntVector);
```

.. to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
.. "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
.. with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

.. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
.. software distributed under the License is distributed on an
.. "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
.. KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
.. specific language governing permissions and limitations
.. under the License.

================
C Data Interface
================

.. contents::

Arrow supports exchanging data without copying or serialization within the same process
through the :ref:`c-data-interface`, even between different language runtimes.

Java to Python
--------------

Use this guide to implement :doc:`Java to Python <../python/integration/python_java.rst>`
communication using the C Data Interface.

Java to C++
-----------

Example: Share an Int64 array from C++ to Java:

**C++ Side**

Use this guide to :doc:`compile arrow <../developers/cpp/building.rst>` library:

.. code-block:: shell

>     git clone https://github.com/apache/arrow.git
>     cd arrow/cpp
>     cmake --preset -N ninja-debug-minimal
>     mkdir build   # from inside the `cpp` subdirectory
>     cd build
>     cmake .. --preset ninja-debug-minimal
>     cmake --build .
>     tree debug/
>     debug/
>     ├── libarrow.800.0.0.dylib
>     ├── libarrow.800.dylib -> libarrow.800.0.0.dylib
>     └── libarrow.dylib -> libarrow.800.dylib

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    $ git clone https://github.com/apache/arrow.git
    $ cd arrow/cpp
    $ mkdir build   # from inside the `cpp` subdirectory
    $ cd build
    $ cmake .. --preset ninja-debug-minimal
    $ cmake --build .
    $ tree debug/
    debug/
    ├── libarrow.800.0.0.dylib
    ├── libarrow.800.dylib -> libarrow.800.0.0.dylib
    └── libarrow.dylib -> libarrow.800.dylib
```

> Define C++ code CDataCppBridge.h that export function **fillCArray** for third party

Reviewer: Ah - because it's in a header, it gets compiled into the javacpp generated sources?

consumers like Java:

.. code-block:: cpp

    #include <iostream>
    #include <arrow/api.h>
    #include <arrow/c/bridge.h>

    using arrow::Int64Builder;

>     void fillCArray(const uintptr_t c_schema_ptr, const uintptr_t c_array_ptr){

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    void FillInt64Array(const uintptr_t c_schema_ptr, const uintptr_t c_array_ptr) {
```

        arrow::Int64Builder builder;
        builder.Append(1);
        builder.Append(2);
        builder.Append(3);
        builder.AppendNull();
        builder.Append(5);
        builder.Append(6);
        builder.Append(7);
        builder.Append(8);
        builder.Append(9);
        builder.Append(10);

>         std::shared_ptr<arrow::Array> array = *builder.Finish();;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        std::shared_ptr<arrow::Array> array = *builder.Finish();
```

        struct ArrowSchema* c_schema = reinterpret_cast<struct ArrowSchema*>(c_schema_ptr);
        auto c_schema_status = arrow::ExportType(*array->type(), c_schema);
        if (!c_schema_status.ok()) c_schema_status.Abort();

        struct ArrowArray* c_array = reinterpret_cast<struct ArrowArray*>(c_array_ptr);
        auto c_array_status = arrow::ExportArray(*array, c_array);
        if (!c_array_status.ok()) c_array_status.Abort();
    }

**Java Side**

For this example, we will use `JavaCPP`_ to call our main C++ **fillCArray** function from Java,
without writing JNI bindings ourselves.

.. code-block:: xml

    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
    <project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"
             xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
             xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
        <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

        <groupId>org.example</groupId>

>         <artifactId>cdatav2</artifactId>

Reviewer: nit: why the "v2"?

Author: Changed

        <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>

        <properties>
            <maven.compiler.source>8</maven.compiler.source>
            <maven.compiler.target>8</maven.compiler.target>

>             <arrow.version>8.0.0.dev254</arrow.version>

Reviewer: Is it possible to use a released version of arrow? That way we can even skip the compilation instructions above

            <dependency>
                <groupId>org.apache.arrow</groupId>
                <artifactId>arrow-c-data</artifactId>
                <version>${arrow.version}</version>
            </dependency>
            <dependency>
                <groupId>org.apache.arrow</groupId>
                <artifactId>arrow-memory-netty</artifactId>
                <version>${arrow.version}</version>
            </dependency>
        </dependencies>
    </project>

.. code-block:: java

    import org.bytedeco.javacpp.annotation.Platform;
    import org.bytedeco.javacpp.annotation.Properties;
    import org.bytedeco.javacpp.tools.InfoMap;
    import org.bytedeco.javacpp.tools.InfoMapper;

    @Properties(
            target = "CDataJavaToCppExample",
            value = @Platform(
                    include = {
                            "CDataCppBridge.h"
                    },
                    compiler = {"cpp11"},
                    linkpath = {"/arrow/cpp/build/debug/"},
                    link = {"arrow"}
            )
    )
    public class CDataJavaConfig implements InfoMapper {

        @Override
        public void map(InfoMap infoMap) {
        }
    }

> .. code-block:: shell
> 
>     // Compile our Java code
>     javac -cp javacpp-1.5.7.jar CDataJavaConfig.java
> 
>     // Generate CDataInterfaceLibrary
>     java -jar javacpp-1.5.7.jar CDataJavaConfig.java
> 
>     // Generate libjniCDataInterfaceLibrary.dylib
>     java -jar javacpp-1.5.7.jar CDataJavaToCppExample.java
> 
>     // Validate libjniCDataInterfaceLibrary.dylib created
>     otool -L macosx-x86_64/libjniCDataJavaToCppExample.dylib
>     macosx-x86_64/libjniCDataJavaToCppExample.dylib:
>         libjniCDataJavaToCppExample.dylib (compatibility version 0.0.0, current version 0.0.0)
>         @rpath/libarrow.800.dylib (compatibility version 800.0.0, current version 800.0.0)
>         /usr/lib/libc++.1.dylib (compatibility version 1.0.0, current version 1200.3.0)
>         /usr/lib/libSystem.B.dylib (compatibility version 1.0.0, current version 1311.0.0)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: shell

    # Compile our Java code
    $ javac -cp javacpp-1.5.7.jar CDataJavaConfig.java

    # Generate CDataInterfaceLibrary
    $ java -jar javacpp-1.5.7.jar CDataJavaConfig.java

    # Generate libjniCDataInterfaceLibrary.dylib
    $ java -jar javacpp-1.5.7.jar CDataJavaToCppExample.java

    # Validate libjniCDataInterfaceLibrary.dylib created
    $ otool -L macosx-x86_64/libjniCDataJavaToCppExample.dylib
    macosx-x86_64/libjniCDataJavaToCppExample.dylib:
        libjniCDataJavaToCppExample.dylib (compatibility version 0.0.0, current version 0.0.0)
        @rpath/libarrow.800.dylib (compatibility version 800.0.0, current version 800.0.0)
        /usr/lib/libc++.1.dylib (compatibility version 1.0.0, current version 1200.3.0)
        /usr/lib/libSystem.B.dylib (compatibility version 1.0.0, current version 1311.0.0)
```

**Java Test**

> Let's create a Java class to Test C Data Interface from Java to C++:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's create a Java class to test our bridge:
```

.. code-block:: java

    import org.apache.arrow.c.ArrowArray;
    import org.apache.arrow.c.ArrowSchema;
    import org.apache.arrow.c.Data;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.BufferAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;

>     import org.apache.arrow.vector.BigIntVector;

Reviewer: We need to depend on `arrow-vector` in our pom right?

Author: Added

    public class TestCDataInterface {
        public static void main(String[] args) {
            try(
                BufferAllocator allocator = new RootAllocator();
                ArrowSchema arrowSchema = ArrowSchema.allocateNew(allocator);
                ArrowArray arrowArray = ArrowArray.allocateNew(allocator)
            ){
                CDataJavaToCppExample.fillCArray(
                        arrowSchema.memoryAddress(), arrowArray.memoryAddress());
                try(
                    BigIntVector bigIntVector = (BigIntVector) Data.importVector(
                            allocator, arrowArray, arrowSchema, null)
                ){

>                     System.out.println("Java using C Data Interface to read Array Filled by C++: "

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                    System.out.println("C++-allocated array: "
```

                            + bigIntVector);

>                 }

Reviewer: We should call `release` on the array and schema right?

Reviewer: Or hmm. Does closing the vector also close the array for you?

Author: It is doing at the end of [ImportVector](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/e379ee1f5a3c4de2defbe631f2cbf5567e574f1d/java/c/src/main/java/org/apache/arrow/c/ArrayImporter.java#L63) by c data library

Reviewer: That doesn't actually call release. So we do need to call release here.

.. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
.. or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
.. distributed with this work for additional information
.. regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
.. to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
.. "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
.. with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

.. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
.. software distributed under the License is distributed on an
.. "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
.. KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
.. specific language governing permissions and limitations
.. under the License.

================
C Data Interface
================

.. contents::

> Arrow supports exchanging data within the same process through the :ref:`c-data-interface`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arrow supports exchanging data without copying or serialization within the same process through the :ref:`c-data-interface`, even between different language runtimes.
```

Java to Python
--------------

Use this guide to implement :doc:`Java to Python <../python/integration/python_java.rst>`
communication using the C Data Interface.

Java to C++
-----------

The C Data Interface is a protocol implemented in Arrow to exchange data within different

> environments without the cost of marshaling and copying data.

Reviewer: I don't think this paragraph is necessary (and it doesn't belong in this section in either case)

Author: Deleted

> Example: How to expose an int32 array using C Data Interface?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: share an Int32 array from C++ to Java:
```

**C++ Side**

> Compile arrow minimal library:

Reviewer: Link to the C++ build docs as well

Author: Added

.. code-block:: shell

    git clone https://github.com/apache/arrow.git
    cd arrow/cpp
    cmake --preset -N ninja-debug-minimal
    mkdir build   # from inside the `cpp` subdirectory
    cd build
    cmake .. --preset ninja-debug-minimal
    cmake --build .
    tree debug/
    debug/
    ├── libarrow.800.0.0.dylib
    ├── libarrow.800.dylib -> libarrow.800.0.0.dylib
    └── libarrow.dylib -> libarrow.800.dylib

> Define c++ code CDataInterfaceLibrary.h that export functions for third party like Java consumer:

Reviewer: We should just use `bridge.h` we should not tell people to reimplement everything

Author: Changed

.. code-block:: cpp

    #include <iostream>
    #include <arrow/api.h>

    #define ARROW_FLAG_DICTIONARY_ORDERED 1
    #define ARROW_FLAG_NULLABLE 2
    #define ARROW_FLAG_MAP_KEYS_SORTED 4

    using arrow::Int64Builder;

    struct ArrowSchema {
        // Array type description
        const char* format;
        const char* name;
        const char* metadata;
        int64_t flags;
        int64_t n_children;
        struct ArrowSchema** children;
        struct ArrowSchema* dictionary;

        // Release callback
        void (*release)(struct ArrowSchema*);
        // Opaque producer-specific data
        void* private_data;
    };

    struct ArrowArray {
        // Array data description
        int64_t length;
        int64_t null_count;
        int64_t offset;
        int64_t n_buffers;
        int64_t n_children;
        const void** buffers;
        struct ArrowArray** children;
        struct ArrowArray* dictionary;

        // Release callback
        void (*release)(struct ArrowArray*);
        // Opaque producer-specific data
        void* private_data;
    };

>     static void release_int32_type(struct ArrowSchema* schema) {

Reviewer: Please follow Arrow coding conventions here.

Author: Deleted

        for (int j = 0; j < int64_array->length(); j++){
            std::cout << "Data To Exchange Value[" << j << "] = " << data[j] << std::endl;
        }

        *array = (struct ArrowArray) {
                // Data description
                .length = int64_array->length(),
                .offset = 0,
                .null_count = 0,
                .n_buffers = 2,
                .n_children = 0,
                .children = NULL,
                .dictionary = NULL,
                // Bookkeeping
                .release = &release_int32_array
        };

        // Allocate list of buffers
        array->buffers = (const void**) malloc(sizeof(void*) * array->n_buffers);
        assert(array->buffers != NULL);
        array->buffers[0] = NULL;  // no nulls, null bitmap can be omitted
        array->buffers[1] = data;

        std::cout << "C Data - Array Pointer = " << array << std::endl;
        std::cout << "C Data - Array Data Pointer Buffer array->buffers[1] = " << array->buffers[1] << std::endl;
    }

**Java Side**

Define Java code CDataInterfaceLibraryConfig.java that consume by JNI C++ functions exported through

> C Data Interface:

Reviewer: "For this example, we will use javacpp (link to project) to call our main C++ function from Java, without writing JNI bindings ourselves."

        <groupId>org.example</groupId>
        <artifactId>cpp-java-cdata</artifactId>
        <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
        <properties>
            <maven.compiler.source>8</maven.compiler.source>
            <maven.compiler.target>8</maven.compiler.target>
        </properties>
        <dependencies>
            <dependency>
                <groupId>org.bytedeco</groupId>
                <artifactId>javacpp</artifactId>
                <version>1.5.7</version>
            </dependency>
            <dependency>
                <groupId>org.apache.arrow</groupId>
                <artifactId>arrow-c-data</artifactId>
                <version>7.0.0</version>
            </dependency>
            <dependency>
                <groupId>org.apache.arrow</groupId>
                <artifactId>arrow-memory-netty</artifactId>
                <version>7.0.0</version>
            </dependency>
        </dependencies>
    </project>

.. code-block:: java

    import org.bytedeco.javacpp.annotation.Platform;
    import org.bytedeco.javacpp.annotation.Properties;
    import org.bytedeco.javacpp.tools.InfoMap;
    import org.bytedeco.javacpp.tools.InfoMapper;

    @Properties(

>             target = "CDataInterfaceLibrary",

Reviewer: I would rather name this something like "CDataInterfaceExample"

Author: Changed

    java -jar javacpp-1.5.7.jar CDataInterfaceLibraryConfig.java

    // Generate libjniCDataInterfaceLibrary.dylib
    java -jar javacpp-1.5.7.jar CDataInterfaceLibrary.java

    // Validate libjniCDataInterfaceLibrary.dylib created
    otool -L macosx-x86_64/libjniCDataInterfaceLibrary.dylib
    macosx-x86_64/libjniCDataInterfaceLibrary.dylib:
            libjniCDataInterfaceLibrary.dylib (compatibility version 0.0.0, current version 0.0.0)
            @rpath/libarrow.800.dylib (compatibility version 800.0.0, current version 800.0.0)
            /usr/lib/libc++.1.dylib (compatibility version 1.0.0, current version 1200.3.0)
            /usr/lib/libSystem.B.dylib (compatibility version 1.0.0, current version 1311.0.0)

**Java Test**

Let's create a Java class to Test C Data Interface from Java to C++:

.. code-block:: java

    import org.apache.arrow.c.ArrowArray;
    import org.apache.arrow.c.ArrowSchema;
    import org.apache.arrow.c.Data;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.BufferAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.BigIntVector;

    public class TestCDataInterfaceV5 {

        public static void main(String[] args) {

>             CDataInterfaceLibrary.ArrowSchema arrowSchema = new CDataInterfaceLibrary.ArrowSchema();

Reviewer: Can we pick different names for these variables? It gets very confusing to have lots of things with the same name.

Author: Changed

            CDataInterfaceLibrary.export_int32_type(arrowSchema);

>             ArrowSchema arrow_schema = ArrowSchema.wrap(arrowSchema.address());

Reviewer: I think in general, this example isn't structured correctly. The specification states that the consumer is expected to allocate the array. So what we should do is:

1. Use ArrowSchema.allocateNew to create the structure
2. Pass the address via javacpp to the JNI function, which populates the structure

We shouldn't be defining our own ArrowSchema class here, and we shouldn't be expecting the C++ code to allocate the ArrowSchema itself.

Author: Changed on this way, thank you

            System.out.println("Java C Data - Schema Pointer = = " + Long.toHexString(arrowSchema.address()));

            CDataInterfaceLibrary.ArrowArray arrowArray = new CDataInterfaceLibrary.ArrowArray();
            CDataInterfaceLibrary.export_int32_array(arrowArray);

            ArrowArray arrow_array = ArrowArray.wrap(arrowArray.address());
            System.out.println("Java C Data - Array Pointer = " + Long.toHexString(arrowArray.address()));
            System.out.println("Java C Data - Array Data Pointer Buffer array->buffers[1] = " + Long.toHexString(arrowArray.buffers(1).address()));

            BufferAllocator allocator = new RootAllocator();
            BigIntVector bigIntVector = (BigIntVector) Data.importVector(allocator, arrow_array, arrow_schema, null);
            System.out.println("Java C Data - BigIntVector: " + bigIntVector);

            CDataInterfaceLibrary.release_int32_type(arrowSchema);

>             CDataInterfaceLibrary.release_int32_array(arrowArray);

Reviewer: Why aren't we using the release callback of the C Data Interface objects?

Author: ArrowArray and ArrowSchema release these after Data.importVector finalize
